Spark is a micro-framework for creating web applications in Kotlin and Java 8 with minimal effort.

Java is one of the most popular programming languages in the world and has been used to create a wide range of applications. Spark Java is a lightweight web framework that makes it easy to build web applications using Java. In this article, we will look at how to build a Java application with Spark Java.

Step 1: Install Java and Maven
The first step in building a Java application with Spark Java is to make sure that you have Java and Maven installed. Java is the programming language that will be used to write the application, while Maven is a build automation tool that will help manage dependencies and build the application.

Step 2: Create a New Maven Project
Once you have Java and Maven installed, you can create a new Maven project.
Step 3: Add Spark Java Dependencies
Next, you need to add Spark Java dependencies to your Maven project. Spark Java dependencies include the Spark Java library and any other libraries that you may need for your application. To add Spark Java dependencies, add the following to your pom.xml file
Step 4: Write the Application
With the Spark Java dependencies in place, you can now write the application. To write the application, create a new Java class and write code to create a web page.

This code creates a simple web page that displays the message “Hello World”. The get method creates a new route and request and response objects are used to handle incoming requests and return a response.

Step 5: Build and Run the Application
With the application written, you can now build and run the application. To build the application, run the following command in your terminal or command prompt
This command will start a web server and run the application. You can access the web page by visiting http://localhost:4567 in your web browser.

Step 6: Customize the Application
With the application up and running, you can now start customizing it to meet your needs. Spark Java provides a range of tools and APIs that make it easy to build complex web applications. You can add additional routes, templates, or any other features that your application needs.

Step 7: Deploy the Application
Finally, when your application is complete, you can deploy it to a web server or hosting platform. Spark Java provides a lightweight and flexible framework that makes it easy to deploy applications to a wide range of platforms. Simply package your application as a JAR file and deploy it to your preferred hosting platform.