1.Control-Oriented Power Allocation for Integrated Satellite-UAV Networks (arXiv)

Author : Chengleyang Lei, Wei Feng, Jue Wang, Shi Jin, Ning Ge

Abstract : This letter presents a sensing-communication-computing-control (SC3) integrated satellite unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) network, where the UAV is equipped with on-board sensors, mobile edge computing (MEC) servers, base stations and satellite communication module. Like the nervous system, this integrated network is capable of organizing multiple field robots in remote areas, so as to perform mission-critical tasks which are dangerous for human. Aiming at activating this nervous system with multiple SC3 loops, we present a control-oriented optimization problem. Different from traditional studies which mainly focused on communication metrics, we address the power allocation issue to minimize the sum linear quadratic regulator (LQR) control cost of all SC3 loops. Specifically, we show the convexity of the formulated problem and reveal the relationship between optimal transmit power and intrinsic entropy rate of different SC3 loops. For the assure-to-be-stable case, we derive a closed-form solution for ease of practical applications. After demonstrating the superiority of the control-oriented power allocation, we further highlight its difference with classic capacity-oriented water-filling method

2.Green Interference Based Symbiotic Security in Integrated Satellite-terrestrial Communications (arXiv)

Author : Zhisheng Yin, Nan Cheng, Tom H. Luan, Yilong Hui, Wei Wang

Abstract : In this paper, we investigate secure transmissions in integrated satellite-terrestrial communications and the green interference based symbiotic security scheme is proposed. Particularly, the co-channel interference induced by the spectrum sharing between satellite and terrestrial networks and the inter-beam interference due to frequency reuse among satellite multi-beam serve as the green interference to assist the symbiotic secure transmission, where the secure transmissions of both satellite and terrestrial links are guaranteed simultaneously. Specifically, to realize the symbiotic security, we formulate a problem to maximize the sum secrecy rate of satellite users by cooperatively beamforming optimizing and a constraint of secrecy rate of each terrestrial user is guaranteed. Since the formulated problem is non-convex and intractable, the Taylor expansion and semi-definite relaxation (SDR) are adopted to further reformulate this problem, and the successive convex approximation (SCA) algorithm is designed to solve it. Finally, the tightness of the relaxation is proved. In addition, numerical results verify the efficiency of our proposed approach

3. Machine Learning-Based User Scheduling in Integrated Satellite-HAPS-Ground Networks(arXiv)

Author : Shasha Liu, Hayssam Dahrouj, Mohamed-Slim Alouini

Abstract : Integrated space-air-ground networks promise to offer a valuable solution space for empowering the sixth generation of communication networks (6G), particularly in the context of connecting the unconnected and ultraconnecting the connected. Such digital inclusion thrive makes resource management problems, especially those accounting for load-balancing considerations, of particular interest. The conventional model-based optimization methods, however, often fail to meet the real-time processing and quality-of-service needs, due to the high heterogeneity of the space-air-ground networks, and the typical complexity of the classical algorithms. Given the premises of artificial intelligence at automating wireless networks design, this paper focuses on showcasing the prospects of machine learning in the context of user scheduling in integrated space-air-ground communications. The paper first overviews the most relevant state-of-the art in the context of machine learning applications to the resource allocation problems, with a dedicated attention to space-air-ground networks. The paper then proposes, and shows the benefit of, one specific application that uses ensembling deep neural networks for optimizing the user scheduling policies in integrated space-high altitude platform station (HAPS)-ground networks. Finally, the paper sheds light on the challenges and open issues that promise to spur the integration of machine learning in space-air-ground networks, namely, online HAPS power adaptation, learning-based channel sensing, data-driven multi-HAPSs resource management, and intelligent flying taxis-empowered systems.