Network Slicing for eMBB, URLLC, and mMTC: An Uplink Rate-Splitting Multiple Access Approach(arXiv)
Author : Yuanwen Liu, Bruno Clerckx, Petar Popovski

Abstract : There are three generic services in 5G: enhanced mobile broadband (eMBB), ultra-reliable low-latency communications (URLLC), and massive machine-type communications (mMTC). To guarantee the performance of heterogeneous services, network slicing is proposed to allocate resources to different services. Network slicing is typically done in an orthogonal multiple access (OMA) fashion, which means different services are allocated non-interfering resources. However, as the number of users grows, OMA-based slicing is not always optimal, and a non-orthogonal scheme may achieve a better performance. This work aims to analyse the performances of different slicing schemes in uplink, and a promising scheme based on rate-splitting multiple access (RSMA) is studied. RSMA can provide a more flexible decoding order and theoretically has the largest achievable rate region than OMA and non-orthogonal multiple access (NOMA) without time-sharing. Hence, RSMA has the potential to increase the rate of users requiring different services. In addition, it is not necessary to decode the two split streams of one user successively, so RSMA lets suitable users split messages and designs an appropriate decoding order depending on the service requirements. This work shows that for network slicing RSMA can outperform NOMA counterpart, and obtain significant gains over OMA in some region.

2. Federated Multi-Discriminator BiWGAN-GP based Collaborative Anomaly Detection for Virtualized Network Slicing(arXiv)

Author : Weili Wang, Chengchao Liang, Lun Tang, Halim Yanikomeroglu, Qianbin Chen

Abstract : Virtualized network slicing allows a multitude of logical networks to be created on a common substrate infrastructure to support diverse services. A virtualized network slice is a logical combination of multiple virtual network functions, which run on virtual machines (VMs) as software applications by virtualization techniques. As the performance of network slices hinges on the normal running of VMs, detecting and analyzing anomalies in VMs are critical. Based on the three-tier management framework of virtualized network slicing, we first develop a federated learning (FL) based three-tier distributed VM anomaly detection framework, which enables distributed network slice managers to collaboratively train a global VM anomaly detection model while keeping metrics data locally. The high-dimensional, imbalanced, and distributed data features in virtualized network slicing scenarios invalidate the existing anomaly detection models. Considering the powerful ability of generative adversarial network (GAN) in capturing the distribution from complex data, we design a new multi-discriminator Bidirectional Wasserstein GAN with Gradient Penalty (BiWGAN-GP) model to learn the normal data distribution from high-dimensional resource metrics datasets that are spread on multiple VM monitors. The multi-discriminator BiWGAN-GP model can be trained over distributed data sources, which avoids high communication and computation overhead caused by the centralized collection and processing of local data. We define an anomaly score as the discriminant criterion to quantify the deviation of new metrics data from the learned normal distribution to detect abnormal behaviors arising in VMs. The efficiency and effectiveness of the proposed collaborative anomaly detection algorithm are validated through extensive experimental evaluation on a real-world dataset.

3. Deep Reinforcement Learning for End-to-End Network Slicing: Challenges and Solutions(arXiv)

Author : Qiang Liu, Nakjung Choi, Tao Han

Abstract : 5G and beyond is expected to enable various emerging use cases with diverse performance requirements from vertical industries. To serve these use cases cost-effectively, network slicing plays a key role in dynamically creating virtual end-to-end networks according to specific resource demands. A network slice may have hundreds of configurable parameters over multiple technical domains that define the performance of the network slice, which makes it impossible to use traditional model-based solutions to orchestrate resources for network slices. In this article, we discuss how to design and deploy deep reinforcement learning (DRL), a model-free approach, to address the network slicing problem. First, we analyze the network slicing problem and present a standard-compliant system architecture that enables DRL-based solutions in 5G and beyond networks. Second, we provide an in-depth analysis of the challenges in designing and deploying DRL in network slicing systems. Third, we explore multiple promising techniques, i.e., safety and distributed DRL, and imitation learning, for automating end-to-end network slicing