Upcoming IP2PGLOBAL P2P CRYTOCURRENCY FINANCING PLATFORM aims to be the first to introduce unsecured crypto loan and ‘REAL’ gold-backed crypto loan products.

The rapid advancement in Blockchain technology opens a host of possibilities to build a comprehensive ﬁnancial services ecosystem in an open and transparent manner. Tapping into this technology, iP2P Global Ltd plans to develop a peer-to-peer (“P2P”) ﬁnancing platform using smart contracts and blockchain technology called iP2PGlobal Personal Financing Platform.

The Platform aims to re-shape personal financing worldwide by offering secured, unsecured and gold-backed crypto loan products, it will also feature a single global benchmark rates for fair loan pricing, compensation fund to cover default risks, full KYC & AML compliance and proper e-lending legal documentation in order to enforce debt collectibility, furthermore financing & disbursement will be in US$ pegged stablecoins to encourage real world usage. The TWQ Token is the platform’s native token, borrowers will have to stake a certain amount of TWQ Tokens when applying for personal financing on the platform.

“Our aims are to introduce crypto currency as a viable medium of exchange to the existing P2P lending model and to use blockchain technology where necessary to create an efficient borrowing & lending system ” said Rashdan Ibrahim CEO of iP2P Global Ltd.

Since the company started its TWQ token public sale campaign on November 18, questions were asked on the basis for the token pricing. The management then decided to ask one of its adviser, a seasoned venture capital and private equity practitioner to do an independent valuation analysis based on the Whitepaper.

Business or company valuation is a process and a set of procedures used to estimate the economic value of an owner’s interest in a business. Although there are long established valuation techniques for equity and debt instruments, evaluating a utility token on the other hand presents its own unique challenge, since its neither equity or debt nor even share on the company’s revenue. A utility token only gives its owner rights to access or use the eco-system its associated with.

However as IP2P Global Ltd does not have any intention in the foreseeable future to do a public equity issuance and since the TWQ token usage has been designed to increase as the platform’s loan volume increases, employing traditional financial valuation techniques will now work. But certain changes were done to accommodate the effect of price volatility and token burning.

“Based on our analysis, TWQ token fair market capitalization will increase from US$28.74 million at the end of Year 1 to US$94.02 million at the end of Year 5, TWQ fair price projections are US$0.57 at the end of Year 1 and US$1.88 at the end of Year 5. These projections are highly dependent on IP2PGlobal meeting its milestones and achieving its business targets.” commented Azmin Hassan, Adviser to iP2P Global Ltd.

One factor that supports the valuation of the iP2PGlobal Platform is that its business model is based on a peer-to-peer lending business, an alternative financial industry that started in 2005 with Zopa in the UK. Therefore the business model is easily understandable and an accurate pro-forma financial model can be done due to availability of market historical data.

Another factor that helps with the valuation is that as a P2P lending platform, iP2PGlobal essentially operates in the financial services industry. Therefore a traditional P/E multiples comparison can be made against the financial services industry average to arrive at the forecasted valuation of the platform and the pro-for a price of TWQ token.

“In general, most subject matter experts conclude that the future of altcoins is still yet to be determined but will rely solely on a given project’s ability to provide firm use cases. The use case for the iP2PGlobal Platform is crystal clear from the onset — they are moving financial services from the conventional market to the Blockchain.” said Azmin Hassan.

However according to Azmin, in the final analysis, the most important factor are the people behind the project itself:

“Established companies and businesses by definition are those who have succeeded. Evaluating private and early stage companies and businesses however requires a more dynamic as well as a rigorous thought process and evaluation framework. Oftentimes as these companies are early stage, the only “tangible” or real element that is available for analysis and evaluation are the people behind the company. History has also proven that success of many great companies and products are attributed to the founders and people behind the companies and the product.”

About the Valuation Report

The complete valuation analysis can be found at the link below:

https://medium.com/@twq.ip2pglobal/valuation-analysis-of-ip2pglobal-p2p-crypto-lending-platform-twq-token-ed87f1727234

About the INITIAL EXCHANGE OFFERING ON EXMARKETS & P2PB2B

iP2PGlobal’s is currently conducting Round II or its initial exchange offerings (“IEO”) on Exmarkets.com and p2pb2b.io the end date of its IEO campaign is December 18th 2019.

The TWQ tokens can be subscribed by using ETH & BTC on Exmarkets and ETH, BTC & USDT on p2pb2b.

Round II: November 30th — December 6th | TWQ Price: $0.10 | 10% bonus on purchases;

Round III: December 12th — 18th | TWQ Price: $0.10 | 5% bonus on purchases;

For more information on TWQ Token’s IEO on Exmarkets, visit: https://exmarkets.com/launchpad/twq-btc

For more information on TWQ Token’s IEO on p2pb2b, visit: https://p2pb2b.io/token-sale/TWQ/1

About IP2P GLOBAL LTD

iP2P Global Ltd is a fintech-blockchain company that was first established in 2015. The company owns iP2PMoney, a P2P fiat lending platform and iP2PGO App, an escrow P2P crypto/fiat Marketplace. The company also provides P2P and Blockchain enterprise solutions to corporates and government.