Understanding network protocols can both increase your network security and potentially save you time and money. Here’s one more quick post in my series on network security that can eliminate noise on your home network.

Do you understand how the TCP protocol works? Devices send a series of packets to make a connection. It’s called a three-way handshake, but it’s really more like a four-way handshake. Presuming you understand something about that, here’s another concept to think about when creating your firewall rules.

If your firewall supports blocking inbound connections — or connections coming from the Internet, you can leverage this rule. I explained why the distinction between inbound and outbound traffic is important in my prior posts on this series on network security. You’ll need a stateful firewall that understands who initiated the connection.

As I mentioned, there are a few inbound packets that may be required on your network. You don’t want to block those. But for the most part, those are UDP packets. Additionally, any incoming packet that is coming from the Internet to your network might be something you can block on most home networks (in other words, inbound traffic to your WAN Port).

So, hmm. I don’t need any TCP SYN packets coming from the Internet, do I? A TCP SYN packet is generated by something external to my network, trying to connect to it. In theory, only my devices should be sending a SYN packet to the Internet.

I set up a rule to block those, initially only blocking HTTP and HTTPS. But then, do I need ANY inbound TCP connections? Sometimes attackers don’t send the initial SYN to try to trick your network security devices or obtain additional information about your network. I do this while pentesting. I’ll send a SYN-ACK without a SYN, for example, using various penetration testing tools. So I don’t want those packets either, and I don’t need to send a response do I? Those are not valid requests.

So what happens when you just block every incoming TCP connection from the Internet and just drop it with no response? (In other words, no SYN-ACK or REJECT response.)

At this point, you can see who’s sending network packets that don’t conform to the traditional network standards using that one rule. For example, Google products seem to send traffic in backward ways even though I specify in my settings that I don’t want to use QUIC or DNS over HTTP. It could also be some other issue with the network or the way my firewall is processing the packets that are causing these logs. I haven’t looked into this yet. Does it matter if I block these? I could set up a rule to only send a response to valid networks. Or I could just ignore it.

You can decide for yourself if you want to allow, disallow, send a response, or not, but everything seems to work fine without allowing this traffic. And this one rule identifies and blocks a whole bunch of other scanners and scammers trying to hit my network. This includes ports like 22 that wouldn’t be captured by my two-high-ports network rule.


You’ll need to understand how network protocols work and whether or not you need it for any of the devices on your network. If you can block this traffic you can probably simply ignore all this noise and focus on more risky traffic in your logs. It is possible that you could block almost all inbound traffic from the Internet using any protocol, including UDP and other protocols. You’ll need to test that out on your particular network and with your particular firewall.